            PURPOSE

The original aim of _Abot_ was to show the divine source and authority
of the traditional law revealed to Moses on Mt. Sinai, and to
demonstrate its continuity from Moses through Joshua, the elders, and
the men of the Great Synagogue, down to those Rabbis who lived during
the period between 200 B.C.E. to 200 C.E.  Loeb maintains that _Abot_
was originally a composition of the Pharisaic Rabbis who wished to
indicate that the traditions held and expounded by them, and which the
Sadducees repudiated, were divine and, in time and sequence,
uninterruptedly authoritative.  This line of continuous tradition
is plainly seen in the first two chapters.  A second and probably
later purpose was to present a body of practical maxims and aphorisms
for the daily guidance of the people.


      The Sadducees belonged to the priestly
      and aristocratic families.  They made light of the oral
      traditions, did not believe in the future life, and were
      indifferent to the independence of the Jewish nation.  The
      Pharisees, on the other hand, were constituted largely from
      the common people; they were believers in, and strict
      observers of, the traditional laws, and were ardent
      nationalists.  The bitter attack of Jesus on them, which has
      resulted in making the word "Pharisee" synonymous with
      "hypocrite" and "self-righteous person," was, to say the
      least, unjust, as Herford has so lucidly pointed out in his
      sympathetic study of the Pharisees.  Herford, though not a
      Jew, has taken up the cudgels most ably in defence of this
      sect, with remarkable insight into the life and literature of
      the ancient Jews.  He demonstrates conclusively that though
      there were hypocrites among the Pharisees, as among all
      classes and creeds, yet the average Pharisee was a man of the
      most elevated religious ideals, who misunderstood Jesus, but
      who, in turn was misunderstood by him.  Huxley, in his
      _Evolution of Theology_, says, "of all the strange ironies in
      history, perhaps the strangest is that 'Pharisee' is current
      as a term of reproach among the theological descendants of
      that sect of Nazarenes who, without the martyr spirit of those
      primitive Puritans, would never have come into existence."
      Such great teachers and men of sterling quality and golden
      utterance as Antigonus of Soko, Hillel,
      Jochanan ben Zakkai, Gamaliel, whose pupil
      was Paul, the apostle, and Judah, the Prince,
      whose sayings grace the pages of _Abot_, were, as Loeb points
      out, of the Pharisaic school or party.  There is naturally a
      large literature on the Pharisees.  Herford's _Pharisaism_
      deserves careful perusal.


         DESCRIPTION

The _Sayings of the Jewish Fathers_ is the oldest collection of
ethical dicta of the Rabbis of the _Mishnah_.  It is a Rabbinic
anthology.  It has been happily styled "a compendium of practical
ethics", and, as Mielziner has said, "these Rabbinical sentences,
if properly arranged, present an almost complete code of human duties".
The _Abot_ is, then, a practical moral code based on Torah.

         LANGUAGE

The language of _Abot_ is easy Mishnaic Hebrew, with portions of four
verses in Aramaic, which is closely
related to Hebrew.  It is worthy of note that these Aramaic portions
originated with the school of Hillel.

      Several centuries before the common
      era, Aramaic was the vernacular of the Jews.  Hebrew, however,
      remained in use as the sacred language ([lashon ha-kodesh]),
      it being the language of the learned, and was employed for
      literary, liturgical, and legal purposes.  This accounts for
      the Mishnah being written almost entirely in Hebrew, though
      Aramaic was spoken on the streets.  It is related of Judah
      ha-Nasi that he disliked the Aramaic jargon to such an extent
      that he forbade its use in his home, where even the servants
      spoke Hebrew with elegance.  When scholars used Aramaic in his presence, 
      he chided them for not speaking in Hebrew or in Greek.


         DEVELOPMENT OF ABOT

It is apparent from the literary construction of _Abot_ that it has
been edited several times, and that, in its earliest form, the
_Abot_ collection was much smaller than we have it to-day.  Originally,
probably shortly after the time of Hillel, it may have been merely a
sort of appendix to the _Tractate Sanhedrin_, with typical sayings of
each of the heads of the _Sanhedrin_.  These dicta are contained in
what is designated as section A.  Later, presumably by Rabbi Akiba,
there were added to this original kernel of _Abot_ the sayings of
Rabbi Jochanan ben Zakkai and his most illustrious pupils, which
comprise section C.  This resulted in the grouping together of the
sayings of ten generations of traditional authorities, as follows:
the men of the Great Synagogue, Simon, the Just, Antigonus
of Soko, Jose ben Joezer and Jose ben Jochanan, Joshua ben
Perachiah and Nittai, the Arbelite, Judah ben Tabbai and Simeon
ben Shatach, Shemaiah and Abtalion, Hillel and Shammai,
Jochanan ben Zakkai, and the latter's disciples.  By association
of idea with this number ten, there were added to this collection
numerical sayings of ten, and, then, others of seven and four, found
in chapter V.

Into this enlarged kernel of pithy sayings of the oldest authorities,
which may be characterized as the _Abot of Rabbi Akiba_, later
_Tannaim_--Rabbi Meir, Rabbi Judah ha-Nasi, and others--interpolated
additional sayings of the afore-mentioned Rabbis, and also typical
utterances of their disciples, and of other well-known teachers.  This
accounts for the presence in _Abot_ of the body of maxims of the six
generations of the school of Hillel. After which we very properly
introduce the aphorisms of Hillel and of his contemporary, Shammai.  
The thread of tradition being
interrupted by this interpolation, it was again taken up by the
introduction of another body of Hillel's sayings, thus providing
for a natural transition from Hillel to Jochanan ben Zakkai.  Proof of
the fact that section B is an addition is that in the _Abot de-Rabbi
Natan_--which, as has been said above, is based on an older version of
_Abot_ --the sayings of Jochanan ben Zakkai follow immediately
upon those of Shammai.  The sayings of Judah ha-Nasi, the redactor of
the _Mishnah_, and of Rabbi Gamaliel, his son, were undoubtedly added
after the time of Judah.


         ABOT IN THE LITURGY

As Taylor has said, "Its simplicity and intrinsic excellence have
secured for _Abot_ a widespread and lasting popularity, and have led
to its being excerpted from the _Talmud_ and used liturgically in the
Synagogue, at certain seasons, from an early period" (19).  Thus, the
_Abot_ is found not only in all editions of the _Mishnah_ and the
_Talmud_, but also in the prayer-books of the Ashkenazic rite (20).
The practice of reading a chapter from _Abot_, on Saturday, after the
afternoon prayer (_Minchah_), originated as early as Gaonic times
(seventh to eleventh centuries).  During the middle of the ninth
century, _Abot_ and its _Baraita_ were thus liturgically used.  In
Spanish communities it was recited in the morning of the Sabbath, and
not in the afternoon.  By the eleventh century, this custom was
universally a part of the synagogal service.

Originally, _Abot_ was probably read only from Passover to _Shebuot;_
and, since this period has generally six Sabbaths, and there are only
five chapters of _Abot_, the chapter _Kinyan Torah_ was appointed to
be read on the sixth Sabbath.  Later, the period of the year in which
_Abot_ was read varied in different communities.  In Germany, there
were _kehillot_ in which it was recited during the winter as well as
during the summer.  In some communities it was read from Passover to
the Feast of Tabernacles (_Sukkot_), in others from the Sabbath of
_Parashah Yitro_ to the Sabbath of _Parashah
Masse'e_ , that is, from the Sabbath on
which is read an account of the giving of the Law until the Sabbath
preceding the beginning of the reading of the "repetition of the Law,"
_i.e._, Deuteronomy.  In many orthodox congregations to-day this
practice is still adhered to, and _Abot_ is read on Sabbath afternoons
during the summer, or from the Sabbath after Passover to the Sabbath
before the New Year (_Rosh ha-Shanah_).

A number of reasons have been suggested for the custom of reading the
_Abot_ in the synagogue, the most likely being that it was introduced
to occupy the minds of worshippers during the long wait, on a summer's
day, between the afternoon and evening services.  Whatever the reason
for this custom may have been is immaterial and unimportant; but what
is of importance is that, by this excellent practice, a whole body of
moral dicta--each one summing up with remarkable conciseness a life's
experience and philosophy, each one breathing the spirit of piety,
saintliness, justice, and love for humanity--has sunk deeply into the
innermost heart and consciousness of the Jewish people, exerting such
an influence that the principles set forth in the _Abot_ have been
eternally wrought into the moral fibre of the descendants of the
Rabbis.  To the lips of the Jew, these maxims spring spontaneously; to
those who know them they are a safe and secure guide through life;
they are not only heard in the synagogue, but are quoted and applied
at home and abroad.  Such are the fruits of a benign custom, which
Israel will do well to prize and preserve.

SAYINGS OF THE FATHERS

_One of the following chapters is read on each Sabbath from the
Sabbath after Passover until the Sabbath before New Year._

All Israel have a portion in the world to come, and it is said,
"And thy people shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land
for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I
may be glorified".

      This does not mean that Israel alone, to the exclusion of
      other nations, will have a portion in the future world.  On
      the future world; "The pious of all nations have a portion in the world to come"
      Maimonides, sums up the Rabbinic opinion.

CHAPTER I

1. Moses received the _Torah_ from Sinai, and handed it down
to Joshua, and Joshua to the elders, and the elders to the
prophets, and the prophets delivered it to the men of the Great
Synagogue (The men of the Great Assembly). They said three things, 
"Be deliberate in judgment; raise up many disciples; and make a fence about the _Torah_".

      The word _Torah_ is usually translated by "law," but it
      means rather "teaching," "instruction" of any kind, or
      "doctrine."  This term is generally used to designate the
      _Five Books of Moses_ or the _Pentateuch_, called the "written
      law" ([torah shebichtav]), but it is also employed as a
      designation of the whole of the Old Testament.  Besides the
      "written law," according to tradition, there was also
      communicated to Moses, on Mt. Sinai, the "oral law" ([torah
      she'b'al peh]), supplementing the former and other laws and
      maxims, and explaining it.  This "oral law" was handed down by
      word of mouth from generation to generation, but subsequently,
      after the destruction of the second Temple, it was committed
      to writing, and constitutes the _Mishnah_, the _Talmud_, and
      the _Midrashim_.  The "oral law" develops, illuminates, and
      comments upon the "written law."  Here, _Torah_ means the
      "oral law," which Moses communicated to Joshua, Joshua, in
      turn, to the elders, and so on. 


      The Great Synagogue, whose establishment, after the return
      from Babylonian captivity, tradition attributes to Ezra the
      Scribe, consisted of 120 men, who comprised the highest
      judicial tribunal, and who occupied a position in the early
      days of the Temple similar to that of the later _Sanhedrin_.
      The historical foundation of this tradition is Nehemiah,
      in which is recounted the solemn acceptance of the Law
      by a great assembly of the people.  The men of the Great
      Synagogue appear here in _Abot_ as the depositaries of the
      tradition of the _Torah_, coming in the chain between the last
      prophets and the earliest scribes.  From this chapter and
      other Rabbinical sources, we gather that the men of the Great
      Synagogue constituted a sort of college of teachers, one of
      the last survivors being Simon, the Just.
      Their work was to interpret, teach, and develop the _Torah_,
      and to them were ascribed all kinds of legal enactments.  They
      instituted the _Shemoneh Esrah_ (the Eighteen Benedictions)
      and other prayers, and cast the entire ritual into definite
      shape.  They admitted _Proverbs_, the _Song of Songs_, and
      _Ecclesiastes_ into the Old Testament canon.  A number of
      modern scholars, notably Kuenen, are of the opinion that this
      body never existed in the form represented by Jewish tradition.  

      Take measures to prevent the breaking of any of the divine
      precepts.  Thereby, certain things which are in themselves
      lawful are prohibited in order to enforce the observance of
      things the doing of which is unlawful.

2. Simon, the Just, was of the last survivors of the Great
Synagogue.  He used to say, "Upon three things the world rests: upon
the _Torah_, upon the Temple service, and upon the doing of acts
of kindness". Simon, the Just, son of Onias, was high-priest about 300 B.C.E.

      It is said, "Great is the _Torah_, for if it did
      not exist, the heaven and the earth would have no permanence."
       _Abodah_ is the service and sacrifice of the Temple which was
      then standing.  After the destruction of the Temple, this word
      was used to designate the service of prayer.  It is used in
      one of the benedictions after the reading of the _Haftarah_:
      _al ha-torah we-al ha-abodah_, "for the law and for the divine
      service."

3. Antigonus of Soko received (the tradition) from Simon, the
Just.  He used to say, "Be not like hirelings who work for their
master for the sake of receiving recompense; but be like servants who
minister to their master without any thought of receiving a reward;
and let the fear of Heaven be upon you."

      According to _Abot de-Rabbi Natan_, Antigonus had two disciples, Zadok and
      Boethos, from whom arose the Sadducees and the heretical sect
      of Boethusians, from their misinterpretation of this verse,
      both denying the doctrines of immortality of the soul and
      resurrection.

      "The fear of Heaven" does not mean dread of punishment,
      but rather awe at the greatness and might of God, and is
      identical with love and service.  
      It is produced by following out the practices
      ordained in the _Torah_.

4. Jose, the son of Joezer, of Zeredah, and Jose, the son of Jochanan,
of Jerusalem received (the tradition) from them.  Jose, the
son of Joezer, of Zeredah said, "Let thy house be a meeting-place for
the wise; cover thyself with the dust of their feet, and drink in
their words with thirst."

      We are told that when two leading
      teachers are named in the _Mishnah_ as having received the
      _Torah_, they constitute a "pair" ([zug]), the first being the
      president([nasi]), and the second the vice-president ([av beit
      din]) of the _Sanhedrin_.  There were five pairs of such
      teachers, flourishing between 170 and 30 B.C.E., the first
      being Jose b. Joezer and Jose b. Jochanan, and the last being
      Hillel and Shammai. It was the custom of pupils to sit at the feet of their
      teachers.

5. Jose, the son of Jochanan, of Jerusalem said, "Let thy house be
open wide; let the poor be members of thy household, and engage not in
much gossip with woman."  This applies to one's own wife; how much
more, then, to the wife of one's neighbor?  Hence the sages say,
"Whoso engages in much gossip with woman brings evil upon himself,
neglects the study of the _Torah_, and will in the end inherit
_gehinnom_".

      Gey-hinim was a glen south of Jerusalem where Moloch was
      worshipped, whence a place where the wicked were punished in
      the hereafter; "hell, being the opposite of 'the Garden of
      Eden,'" "paradise."

6. Joshua, the son of Perachyah, and Nittai, the Arbelite, received
(the tradition) from them.  Joshua, the son of Perachyah, said,
"Provide thyself with a teacher, and possess thyself of a companion, 
(a fellow student); and judge every man in the scale of merit."

7. Nittai, the Arbelite, said, "Keep aloof from a bad neighbor;
associate not with the wicked, and abandon not the belief in
retribution". This may mean either that one must not imagine that
punishment for evil deeds will not befall him, or when punishment 
has been meted out, one must not despair of the good.

8. Judah, the son of Tabbi, and Simeon, the son of Shatach,
received (the tradition) from them.  Judah, the son of Tabbi, said,
"(In the judge's office) act not the counsel's part; while the
litigants are standing before thee (in court), let them be regarded by thee 
as guilty, but when they are departed from thy presence, regard them as
innocent, the verdict having been acquiesced in by them."
He lived about 104-69 B.C.E.  He was a leader of the Pharisees at the time of 
Alexander Jannaeus. He viewed that a judge should be strictly impartial.

9. Simeon, the son of Shatach, said, "Be very searching in the
examination of witnesses, and be guarded in thy words, lest
through them they learn to lie."

      It is related that the son of Simeon b. Shatach was
      innocently condemned to death, because the witnesses were not
      carefully cross-questioned.

10. Shemaiah and Abtalion received (the tradition) from them.
Shemaiah said, "Love work; hate lordship; and seek no intimacy
with the ruling power". He said, "Woe to leadership, for it buries those 
who possess it." The ruling power was Rome and his statement cautions
avoidance of office seeking.

11. Abtalion said, "Ye sages, be heedful of your words, lest ye incur
the penalty of exile and be exiled to a place of evil waters, and the
disciples who come after you drink thereof and die, and the Heavenly
Name be profaned".

      Scholars must be careful in their teachings, lest their
      disciples misinterpret their words, and thus adopt false
      doctrines, as was the case with the disciples of Antigonus of
      Soko.  "Evil waters" may stand for evil
      doctrines or evil people.  When a teacher went into
      banishment, he was usually followed by his disciples.
      Departure from the law is equivalent to death.

12. Hillel and Shammai received (the tradition) from them.
Hillel said, "Be of the disciples of Aaron, loving peace and pursuing
peace, loving mankind and drawing them night to the _Torah_".
  
13. He used to say, "A name made great is a name destroyed (he who seeks
fame loses it);
he who does not increase (his knowledge) decreases (it); and he
who does not study deserves to die; and he who makes a worldly use of
the crown (of the _Torah_) shall waste away."  14. He used to say, "If
I am not for myself, who will be for me?  But if I care for myself
only, what am I? And if not now, when?"

      Hillel and Shammai, the most renowned of the "pairs"
      ([zugot]), lived about 100 years before the destruction of the
      Temple.  Each was the founder of a school, _Bet Hillel_ and
      _Bet Shammai_, being generally opposed to one another in the
      interpretation of the _Torah_.  Hillel was the embodiment of
      humility, gentleness, and kindness; Shammai was irritable, and
      lacked gentleness and patience.  The former's most celebrated
      saying is, "What is hateful to thee do not do unto thy fellow
      man; this is the whole _Torah_, the rest is mere commentary."

15. Shammai said, "Set a fixed time for thy (study of) _Torah;_ say
little and do much; and receive all men with a cheerful
countenance." To say little and do much is also read as to "promise little.
Be like Abraham, who promised only bread, but brought a "calf tender and good".

16. Rabban Gamaliel said, "Provide thyself with a teacher; be
quit of doubt; and accustom not thyself to give tithes by a
conjectural estimate."

      There were three kinds of tithes (the tenth part of
      anything): (a) "the first tithe" (_maaser rishon), given to
      the Lebites; "the second tithe" (_maaser sheni_), taken to
      Jerusalem and consumed there by the owner and his family; and
      (c) the tithe paid to the poor (_maaser ani_).

17. Simeon his son, said, "All my days I have grown up amongst
the wise, and I have found nothing better for man than silence;
not learning but doing is the chief thing; and whoso multiplies
words causes sin". Simeon beg Gamaliel lived at the time of the war with
Rome. 

18. Rabban Simeon, the son of Gamaliel said, "By three things is
the world preserved; by truth, by judgment, and by peace, as it
is said, 'Judge ye the truth and the judgment of peace in your gates'".
_Torah_, Temple service, and benevolence are the foundations and, 
at the same time, the aims of the world. 
Truth, judgment, and peace maintain the world's permanency.

Rabbi Chanania, the son of Akashia, said, "The Holy One, blessed
be He, was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore He gave them a
copious _Torah_ and many commandments, as it is said, 'It pleased the
Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the _Torah_ and make it
honorable'".

CHAPTER II

All Israel have a portion in the world to come, and it is said, "And
thy people shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land for
ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be
glorified".

1. Rabbi (1) said, "which is the right course that a man should choose
for himself? (2)  That which is a pride to him who pursues it and
which also brings him honor from mankind.  Be as scrupulous about a
light precept as about a grave one, for thou knowest not the grant of
reward for each precept.  Reckon the loss incurred by the fulfilment
of a precept against the reward secured by its observance (3), and the
gain gotten by a transgression against the loss it involves.  Consider
three things, that thou mayest not come within the power of sin (4).
Know what is above thee--a seeing eye, and a hearing ear, and all thy
deeds written in a book" (5).

      (1) Rabbi Judah (135-220 C.E.), son of Simeon (chapter I, 18),
      was known as "Rabbi," as a mark of distinction, owing to the
      fact that he was the chief reviser and compiler of the
      _Mishnah_.  Earlier compilers of the _Mishnah_ had been
      Hillel, Akiba, and R. Meir.  Rabbi Judah was also known as
      _Rabbenu_ (our Master), _ha-Nasi_ (the Prince), and
      _ha-Kodesh_ (the Holy).  He is said to have died[*] on the day
      that Akiba met his death at the hands of the Romans. 

      (2) Maimonides interprets this verse as meaning to pursue a
      medium course between two equally bad extremes, the _too much_
      and the _too little_.  On this subject, see his celebrated
      fourth chapter of the _Shemonah Perakim_ (_The Eight
      Chapters_) on the "mean"; ed. Gorfinkle, p. 54, _et seq._

      (3) _I.e._, the loss in this world as against the reward in
      the future world.  On the Rabbinic idea of reward and
      punishment, see Schechter, _Aspects_, pp. 162-163, and
      Herford, _Pharisaism_, p. 267 _et seq._

      (4) Cf. chapter III, 1.  No deeds, great or small, are lost
      sight of by God.

2. Rabban Gamaliel, the son of Rabbi Judah, the Prince, said,
"Excellent is the study of _Torah_ combined with some worldly pursuit
(6), for the effort demanded by them both makes sin to be forgotten.
All study of _Torah_ without work must at length be futile, and leads
to sin (7).  Let all who are employed with the congregation act with
them for Heaven's sake, for then the merit of their fathers sustains
them, and their righteousness endures for ever (8).  And as for you
(God will then say), 'I account you worthy of great reward, as if you
had wrought it all yourselves.'  3. Be on your guard against the
ruling power (9); for they who exercise it draw no man near to them
except for their own interests; appearing as friends when it is to
their own advantage, they stand not by a man in the hour of his need."
 4. He used to say, "Do His will as if it were thy will.  Nullify thy
will before His will, that He may nullify the will of others before
thy will."

      (6) The expression _Talmud Torah_ (lit., "study of the Law")
      means the study of all sacred learning.  The word _Torah_,
      here, is to be construed in its broadest sense.  See chapter
      I, n. 4.  Such study was one of the duties to which no limit
      was fixed (_Peah_ I, 1).  The expression [derech eretz] means
      "good manners" (chapter III, 21), or "worldly business," or
      "care" (chapter III, 6), according to the context.  Study
      combined with some trade or profession is, according to R.
      Gamaliel, the proper thing.

      (7) Cf. _Kiddushin_, 29a, "He who does not teach his son a
      trade teaches him to be a thief."

      (8) In every community, the work and goodness of past
      generations live in the present, and the good that the
      community does in the present will live on in the future.

      (9) This verse is directed toward the leaders of the
      community.

5. Hillel said, "Separate not thyself from the congregation (11);
trust not in thyself until the day of thy death (12); judge not thy
neighbor until thou art come into his place; and say not anything
which cannot be understood at once, in the hope that it will be
understood in the end (13); neither say, 'When I have leisure I will
study'; perchance thou wilt have no leisure."  6. He used to say, "An
empty-headed man cannot be a sin-fearing man, nor can an ignorant
person (14) be pious, nor can a shamefaced man (15) learn, nor a
passionate man (16) teach, nor can one who is engaged overmuch in
business grow wise (17).  In a place where there are no men, strive to
be a man" (18).  7. Moreover, he once saw a skull floating on the
surface of the water.  He said to it, "Because thou didst drown
(others) they have drowned thee, and at the last they that drowned
thee shall themselves be drowned" (19).  8. He used to say, "The more
flesh, the more works; the more property, the more anxiety; the more
women, the more witchcraft; the more maid-servants, the more lewdness;
the more men-servants, the more robbery; the more _Torah_, the more
life (20); the more schooling, the more wisdom; the more counsel, the
more understanding; the more charity, the more peace.  He who has
acquired a good name has acquired it for himself; he who has acquired
for himself words of _Torah_ has acquired for himself life in the
world to come" (21).

      (11) _I.e._, share its weal and woe.  Cf. _Taanit_, 11a, "He
      who does not join the community in times of danger and trouble
      will never enjoy the divine blessing."

      (12) One should constantly be on guard against oneself.  The
      _Talmud_ (_Berachot_, 29a) illustrates this saying by
      referring to a certain Jochanan, who, after having been
      high-priest for eighty years, became a heretic.

      (13) This verse may be variously translated and interpreted.
      Its translation here is in accordance with the interpretation
      of Maimonides.  Do not express yourself in such a way that
      your words may be understood only after careful study and deep
      thought, but let them be clear and intelligible.

      (14) The word [bur (bet-vov-resh)] means "uncultivated"
      ([sadeh bur] "an uncultivated field").  It is used of an
      ignorant, uncultured, mannerless person, possessing no moral
      or spiritual virtues.  Taylor translates it by "boor."  [am
      ha'aretz], literally "people of the land," "country people,"
      is applied to an individual who may possess good manners, and
      may be literate, but who has no religious knowledge, nor
      training, nor does not observe religious customs.  Taylor
      renders it "vulgar."  Mayer Sulzberger maintains that this
      term was applied to an assembly of representatives of the
      people constituting a body similar to the modern Parliament,
      and divided into a lower and upper house.

      (15) _I.e._, he who is ashamed to ask questions for fear of
      exposing his ignorance.

      (16) He who has no patience to answer all the questions of his
      pupils.

      (17) Cf. chapter IV, 12.  One of the qualifications necessary
      for the acquirement of the _Torah_ is moderation in business.

      (18) Do not boldly push yourself forward; but where there is
      no one to fill the position of teacher or leader, or to be the
      head of the community, and you have the qualifications, do not
      shrink from being the man.

      (19) Retribution is sure, "with what measure a man measures, is it measured unto
      him."

      (21) The expression "the world to come" may mean the Messianic
      days, the time after the Messianic era, the days after the
      resurrection or the spiritual hereafter.

9. Rabban Jochanan, the son of Zakkai (22) received (the tradition)
from Hillel and Shammai.  He used to say, "If thou hast learnt much
_Torah_, ascribe not any merit to thyself, for thereunto wast thou
created."

      (22) Rabban Jochanan ben Zakkai was known as the least of the
      disciples of Hillel.  He was a contemporary of the historian
      Josephus.  Escaping in a coffin from Jerusalem, when it was
      besieged by the Roman general Vespasian, and predicting the
      latter's elevation to the imperial dignity, Jochanan was
      allowed by Vespasian to go to Jabneh (Jamnia), where he
      founded the celebrated academy which became the centre of
      learning in Palestine, as Jerusalem had previously been.  He
      was the most important scribe in the first decade after the
      destruction of the Temple (70 C.E.).

10. Rabban Jochanan, the son of Zakkai, had five disciples (23), and
these are they: Rabbi Eliezer, the son of Hyrcanus; Rabbi Joshua, the
son of Hananiah; Rabbi Jose, the Priest; Rabbi Simeon, the son of
Nataniel; and Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Arach.  11. He used thus to
recount their praise: "Eliezer, the son of Hyrcanus, is a cemented
cistern, which loses not a drop (25); Joshua, the son of Hananiah,
happy is she that bare him (26); Jose, the Priest, is a pious man
(27); Simeon, the son of Nataniel, is a fearer of sin; Eleazar, the
son of Arach, is like a spring flowing with ever-sustained vigor"
(28).  12. He used to say, "If all the sages of Israel were in one
scale of the balance, and Eliezer, the son of Hyrcanus, in the other,
he would outweigh them all."  Abba Saul (29) said in his name, "If all
the sages of Israel were in one scale of the balance, and Eliezer, the
son of Hyrcanus, also with them, and Eleazar, the son of Arach, in the
other scale, he would outweigh them all."  13. He said to them, "Go
forth and see which is the good way to which a man should cleave."  R.
Eliezer said, "A good eye" (30); R. Joshua said, "A good friend"; R.
Jose said, "A good neighbor" (31); R. Simeon said, "One who foresees
the fruit of an action" (32); R. Eleazar said, "A good heart."
Thereupon he said to them, "I approve of the words of Eleazar, the son
of Arach, rather than your words, for in his words yours are included"
(33).  14. He said to them, "Go forth and see which is the evil way
that a man should shun."  R. Eliezer said, "An evil eye" (34); R.
Joshua said, "A bad friend"; R. Jose said, "A bad neighbor"; R. Simeon
said, "One who borrows and does not repay--it is the same whether one
borrows from man or the Omnipresent (35); as it is said, 'The wicked
borroweth and payeth not again, but the righteous dealeth graciously
and giveth'"; R. Eleazar said, "A bad heart."  Thereupon he said
to them, "I approve of the words of Eleazar, the son of Arach, rather
then your words, for in his words yours are included."

      (23) Of special excellence.

      (25) He forgets nothing he has learned.  On R. Eliezer, see
      Danziger, _ibid._, 91-121.

      (26) When yet a child in the cradle, his mother took him into
      the synagogue that he might thus early hear the words of the
      _Torah_.

      (27) A _chasid_ ([chasid]), "saint," is one who does more than
      the strict letter of the law requires.

      (28) "A welling spring" (Taylor).

      (29) He lived in the first half of the second century, C.E.

      (30) _I.e._, an eye that looks upon people with benevolence
      and kind feelings, free from envy and ill-will.

      (31) A good friend is one who induces his associate to study
      _Torah_, and who reproves him when he sees him doing wrong.
      The passage means not so much to gain a good friend as to _be_
      a good friend.

      (32) One who balances the present against the future.

      (33) The heart was considered the seat of all moral and
      spiritual functions.

      (34) Denotes niggardliness, envy, or jealousy.

      (35) _I.e._, one who lacks foresight and incurs
      responsibilities he is unable to meet borrows from God, as all
      wealth belongs to Him, and men are merely His stewards.  The
      word [makom], literally "place," "space," was used to
      designate Jerusalem, or the Temple, as being _the_ place where
      God's spirit dwells; or it may also refer to the divine court
      of the _Sanhedrin_.  It then came to be used as an appellative
      for God.  As Schechter remarks, "The term is mainly indicative
      of God's ubiquity in the world and can best be translated by
      'Omnipresent.'"

15. They each said three things.  R. Eliezer said, "Let thy friend's
honor be as dear to thee as thine own; be not easily excited to
anger; and repent one day before thy death" (38).  And (he further
said), "Warm thyself by the fire of the wise, but beware of their
glowing coals, lest thou be burnt, for their bite is the bite of the
fox, and their sting is the scorpion's sting, and their hiss is the
serpent's hiss, and all their words are like coals of fire" (39).  16.
R. Joshua said, "The evil eye, the evil inclination (40), and hatred
of his fellow-creatures (41), put a man out of the world."  17. R.
Jose said, "Let the property of thy friend be as dear to thee as thine
own; prepare thyself for the study of _Torah_, since the knowledge of
it is not an inheritance of thine, and let all thy deeds be done in
the name of God" (42).  18. R. Simeon said, "Be careful in reading the
_Shema_ (43) and the _Amidah_ (44); and when thou prayest, consider
not thy prayer as a fixed (mechanical) task, but as (an appeal for)
mercy and grace before the All-present, as it is said, 'For he is
gracious and full of mercy, slow to anger, and abounding in
loving-kindness, and repenteth him of the evil'; and be not
wicked in thine own esteem" (46).  19. R. Eleazar said, "Be diligent
in studying _Torah_, and know what answer to give to the unbeliever
(47); know also before whom thou toilest, and who thy Employer is, who
will pay thee the reward of thy labor."


      (38) Man should repent every day of his life, for he knows not
      on what day he may die.

      (39) One who wishes to warm himself remains a certain distance
      away from the fire; if he approaches too near, he is burned;
      so, do not endeavor to become too intimate with the wise, as
      their opinion of you may change to your detriment.  The
      "bite," the "sting," and the "hiss" represent the terribleness
      of the looks of the wise who have been angered.

      (40) Passion, evil nature, or evil inclination.

      (41) Misanthropy.

      (42) In making man's highest ideal the comprehension of God,
      Maimonides, in the _Shemonah Perakim_, supports his view by
      referring to the latter part of this verse.  He says, "The
      sages of blessed memory, too, have summed up this idea in so
      few words and so concisely, at the same time elucidating the
      whole matter with such complete thoroughness, that when one
      considers the brevity with which they express this great and
      mighty thought in its entirety, about which others have
      written whole books and yet without adequately explaining it,
      one truly recognizes that the Rabbis undoubtedly spoke through
      divine inspiration.  This saying is found among their
      precepts, and is, 'Let all thy deeds be done in the name of
      God.'".

      (43) This prayer consists of three portions of the Pentateuch
      , and gets its name from the initial word of the first portion.  
      It is appointed to be read twice daily, in the morning and in the evening.  

      (44) An important part of the ritual said at the daily
      morning, afternoon, and evening service, and also at the
      additional service on Sabbaths and holy days, is  known as (1)
      _Tefillah_ (prayer)_, or (2) _Shemoneh Esreh_ (eighteen), or
      (3) _Amidah_ (standing).  It is known as _Tefillah_ because it
      is considered the prayer _par excellence;_ as _Shemoneh Esreh_
      because originally it consisted of eighteen prayers (now
      nineteen); and as _Amidah_ (by Sephardic Jews) because it must
      be said standing.  The _Shema_ and the _Shemoneh Esreh_ have
      been appropriately styled the "two pillars of the fabric of
      the liturgy."

      (46) Do not do what your conscience tells you is wrong, even
      though it does not appear to others as such; or, do not sin in
      secret, thinking that you will escape punishment because
      others do not see you.

      (47) _Apikuros_ is a term originally used to designate a
      follower of the philosopher Epicurus, whose axiom was that
      "happiness or enjoyment is the _summum bonum_ of life."
      Later, this word was used by the Rabbis to designate a
      free-thinker, a heretic, an unbeliever, or a despiser of the
      Law, Jewish or non-Jewish.  Josephus (_Antiquities_, X, 11, 7,
      ed. Whiston-Margoliouth, p. 300) describes the Epicureans as
      those "who cast providence out of human life, and do not
      believe that God takes care of the affairs of the world, nor
      that the universe is governed and continued in being by that
      blessed and immortal nature, but say that the world is carried
      along of its own accord without a ruler and a curator."
      Maimonides, in his commentary on _Sanhedrin_, X, 1, derives
      the word from the Hebrew, [hefkeir (hey-fey-kuf-resh)],
      "freedom," and defines it as one who refuses obedience to the
      Law.  Schechter (_Studies in Judaism_, I, p. 158) says, "It
      implies rather a frivolous treatment of the words of Scripture
      and tradition."  See the _Jewish Encyclopedia_ art.
      _Apikuros_, and Barton, _Ecclesiastes_, p. 41.  This verse may
      also be rendered, "Study _Torah_, and also know ([v'da
      (vov-daled-ayin)]) how to answer an unbeliever," meaning that
      first one should study _Torah_ and _Talmud_, and then give his
      time to learning other knowledge, so as to be able to refute
      those who stray from the truth.

20. Rabbi Tafron said, "The day is short, the task is great (49),
the laborers are sluggish, the reward is much, and the Master of the
house (50) is urgent."  21. He also used to say, "It is not thy duty
to complete the work, but neither art thou free to desist from it; if
thou hast studied much _Torah_, much reward will be given thee; and
faithful is thy Employer to pay thee the reward of thy labor; and know
that the grant of reward unto the righteous will be in the time to
come" (51).

Rabbi Chanania, the son of Akashia, said, "The Holy One, blessed be
He, was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore He gave them a
copious _Torah_ and many commandments, as it is said, 'It pleased the
Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the _Torah_ and make it
honorable'".

      (49) The day, _i.e._, the life of man, is brief.  Art is long,
      but life is short.

      (50) _I.e._, God.

      (51) A man cannot finish the work of the world, yet he must
      not yield to idleness and despair, but must do his share to
      the best of his ability.  His reward will come in the future.


CHAPTER III

All Israel have a portion in the world to come, and it is said, "And
thy people shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land for
ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be
glorified".

1. Akabia (1), the son of Mahalalel, said, "Consider three things, and
thou wilt not come within the power of sin: know whence thou
camest, and whither thou art going, and before whom thou wilt in the
future have to give an account and reckoning (3).  Whence thou camest:
from a fetid drop; whether thou art going: to a place of dust, worms,
and maggots (4); and before whom thou wilt in the future have to give
an account and reckoning: before the Supreme King of kings, the Holy
One, blessed be He."

      (1) He lived about the middle of the first century.

      (3) Compare with this saying the exposition by Akiba of Eccl:
      "but remember thy creator."
       Playing upon the word [bor'ech], he says, "Remember thy
      source, thy grave and thy creator."
      If man thinks of whence he comes, he is rendered humble; if he
      reflects upon whither he is going, he prizes worldly things
      lightly; and if he considers HIm before whom he must give an
      account, he obeys God's laws.

2. R. Chanina, the Vice-High-Priest (5), said, "Pray for the welfare
of the government, since but for the fear thereof men would swallow
each other alive" (6).

      (5) Chief of the priests, adjutant high-priest.  The _segan_
      was next in rank to the high-priest.  None could be appointed
      high-priest unless he had occupied the office of the _segan_
      (Palestinian _Talmud_, _Yoma_, III, 41a, top).  According to
      Schurer, he was "the captain of the Temple," whose duty it was
      to superintend arrangements for keeping order in and around
      the Temple.  He was also present at all important functions in
      which the high-priest took part, such as the drawing of lots
      in the case of the two goats on _Yom Kippur_ (_Yoma III, 9,
      IV, 1); when reading from the _Torah_ (_Yoma_, VII, 1; _Sotah_
      VII, 7, 8), and when offering the daily sacrifice (_Tamid_
      VII, 3).  Rabbi Chanina was the last to bear this title, his
      son being known as Simeon ben ha-Segan.

      (6) "And seek the peace of the city whither
      I have caused you to be carried away captives, and pray unto
      the Lord for it; for in the peace thereof shall ye have
      peace."

3. R. Chananiah, the son of Teradion (7), said, "If two sit together
and interchange no words of _Torah_, they are a meeting of scorners,
concerning whom it is said, 'The godly man sitteth not in the seat of
the scorners' (8); but if two sit together and interchange words of
_Torah_, the Divine Presence (9) abides among them; as it is said,
'Then they that feared the Lord spake one with the other; and the Lord
hearkened and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before Him,
for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon His name,'.
Now the Scripture enables me to draw this inference in respect to two
persons; whence can it be deduced that if even one person sedulously
occupies himself with the _Torah_, the Holy One, blessed be He,
appoints unto him a reward?  Because it is said, 'though he sit alone,
and meditate in stillness, yet he taketh it (the reward) upon him'".

      (7) He lived about 120 C.E.  He was the father of Beruriah,
      the wife of Rabbi Meir.

      (8) Ps. I, 1.  Verse 2 of this psalm continues, "But his
      delight is in the Law of the Lord."

      (9) [shechinah] literally "dwelling," is a name applied to God
      when He is spoken of as dwelling among men.

4. R. Simeon (12) said, "If three have eaten at a table and have
spoken there no words of _Torah_, it is as if they had eaten of
sacrifices to dead idols, of whom it is said, 'For all their tables
are full of vomit and filthiness; the All-present is not (in their
thoughts)' (13).  But if three have eaten at a table and have spoken
there words of _Torah_, it is as if they had eaten at the table of the
All-present, for Scripture says, 'And he said unto me, This is the
table that is before the Lord'" (14).

      (12) Rabbi Simeon ben Yochai lived about the middle of the
      second century C.E., and was a pupil of Akiba.  See Danziger,
      _ibid._, pp. 211-241.  He was long thought to be the author of
      the well-known kabbalistic work _Zohar_, which was, however,
      probably written in the thirteenth century by Moses Shem Tob
      de Leon.

      (13) The literal interpretation of [bli
      makom] is, there is "no place" clean of defilement; but the
      word [makom] being used to designate God, suggests the interpretation, 
      "without mention of the name of God."

5. R. Chanina, the son of Hakinai (15), said, "He who keeps awake at
night, and goes on his way alone, while turning his heart to vanity,
such a one forfeits his own life" (16).

      (15) He lived about 120 C.E., and was a pupil of Akiba.  See
      Bacher, _ibid._, 436 _et seq._

      (16) Even the sleepless man and the solitary traveller must
      turn their thoughts to the _Torah_.

6. R. Nechunya, son of ha-Kanah (17), said, "Whoso receives upon
himself the yoke of the _Torah_, from the yoke of the kingdom and the
yoke of worldly care will be removed (18), but whoso breaks off from
him the yoke of the _Torah_, upon him will be laid the yoke of the
kingdom and the yoke of worldly care."

      (17) He lived about 80 C.E.  See Bacher, _ibid._, pp. 58-61.

      (18) The "yoke of the kingdom" refers to the taxes and burdens
      exacted by the government; the "yoke of worldly care" is
      anxiety of the struggle for existence.

7. R. Chalafta, the son of Dosa (19), of the village of Chanania said,
"When ten people sit together and occupy themselves with the _Torah_,
the _Shechinah_ (20) abides among them, as it is said, 'God standeth
in the congregation (21) of the godly'.  And whence can it be
shown that the same applies to five?  Because it is said, 'He hath
found his band (23) upon the earth'.  And whence can it be shown
that the same applies to three?  Because it is said, 'He judgeth among
the judges'.  And whence can it be shown that the same applies to
two?  Because it is said, 'Then they that feared the Lord spake one
with the other; and the Lord hearkened, and heard'.  And whence
can it be shown that the same applies even to one?  Because it is
said, 'In every place where I cause my name to be remembered I will
come unto thee and I will bless thee'".


      An _edah_ translates literally to "assembly," "congregation," "prayer-meeting,"
      and consists of at least ten persons.


      (23) An _agudah_ (literally, "bundle," "bunch"), "bond," "union,"
      is constituted of at least five, though some authorities
      maintain that it stands for three.  See Taylor, _Sayings_, p.
      46, n. 15.  This word is used in the name of a number of
      Jewish societies whose members bind themselves to brotherly
      love and mutual assistance. as _Agudat Achim_, "United
      Brethren," etc.


8. R. Eleazar of Bertota (28) said, "Give unto Him of what is His, for
thou and thine are His: this is also found expressed by David, who
said, 'For all things come of Thee, and of Thine own we have given
Thee'"

      (28) He lived during the second century C.E.

9. R. Jacob said, "He who is walking by the way and studying, and
breaks off his study and says, 'How fine is that tree, how fine is
that fallow,' him the Scripture regards as if he had forfeited his
life" (30).

      (30) One must not interrupt his studies even to admire the
      beauties of nature.

10. R. Dostai (31), the son of Jannai, said in the name of R. Meir
(32), "Whoso forgets one word of his study, him the Scripture regards
as if he had forfeited his life, for it is said, 'Only take heed to
thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things
which thine eyes have seen'.  Now, one might suppose (that the
same result follows) even if a man's study has been too hard for him.
(To guard against such an inference), it is said, 'And lest they
depart from thy heart all the days of thy life'.  Thus a person's
guilt is not established until he deliberately and of set purpose
removes those lessons from his heart."

      (31) He lived about 160 C.E.

      (32) Rabbi Meir was the celebrated pupil of Akiba.  His wife
      was the well-known Bruriah.

11. R. Chanina, the son of Dosa (35), said, "He in whom the fear of
sin precedes wisdom, his wisdom shall endure; but he in whom wisdom
comes before the fear of sin, his wisdom will not endure" (36).  12.
He used to say, "He whose works exceed his wisdom, his wisdom shall
endure; but he whose wisdom exceeds his works, his wisdom will not
endure".  13. He used to say, "He in whom the spirit of his
fellow-creatures takes not delight, in him the Spirit of the
All-present takes not delight."

      (35) A contemporary of Jochanan ben Zakkai (10 B.C.E.-90
      C.E.).

      (36) "The beginning of wisdom is the fear of
      the Lord."  "A man's fear of sin should be instinctive, rather
      than a result of calculation, . . . a man should build upon
      the foundation of religious feeling, rather than upon
      philosophy".

14. R. Dosa, the son of Horkinas (38), said, "Morning sleep, midday
wine, childish babbling, and attending the houses of assembly of the
ignorant waste a man's life" (39).

      (38) A contemporary of Jochanan ben Zakkai.

      (39) Idleness, etc., indispose one for the study of the
      _Torah_ and for business.

15. R. Eleazar ha-Mudai said, "He who profanes things sacred, and
despises the festivals, and puts his fellow-man to shame in public,
and makes void the covenant of Abraham, our father (40), and makes the
_Torah_ bear a meaning other than the right (41); (such a one) even
though knowledge of the _Torah_ and good deeds be his, has no share in
the world to come" (42).

      (40) _I.e._ circumcision.

      (41) Or "acts barefacedly against the _Torah_."

      (42) Knowledge and moral excellence alone are not sufficient.

16. R. Ishmael (43) said, "Be submissive to a superior (44), affable
to the young, and receive all men with cheerfulness".

      (43) Lived about 120 C.E.  See Bacher, _ibid._, pp. 240-271.

      (44) Or "be pliant of disposition."

17. R. Akiba (47) said, "Jesting and levity lead a man on to lewdness.
 The _Massorah_ (48) is a rampart around the _Torah_; tithes are a
safeguard to riches; good resolves are a fence to abstinence;
a hedge around wisdom is silence".  18. He used to say,
"Beloved is man, for he was created in the image (of God); but it was
by a special love that it was made known to him that he was created in
the image of God, as it is said, 'For in the image of God made he man'.
Beloved are Israel, or they were called children of the
All-present, but it was by a special love that it was made known to
them that they were called children of the All-present, as it is said,
'Ye are children unto the Lord your God'.  Beloved are Israel,
for unto them was given the desirable instrument; but it was by a
special love that it was made known to them that that desirable
instrument was theirs, through which the world was created, as it is
said, 'For I give you good doctrine; forsake ye not my _Torah_'.
19. Everything is foreseen, yet free will is given (56); and the world
is judged by grace, yet all is according to the amount of the work"
(57).  20. He used to say, "Everything is given on pledge (58), and a
net is spread for all living (59); the shop is open (60); the dealer
gives credit; the ledger lies open; the hand writes; and whosoever
wishes to borrow may come and borrow; but the collectors regularly
make their daily round, and exact payment from man whether he be
content or not (61); and they have that whereon they can rely in their
demand; and the judgment is a judgment of truth (62); and everything
is prepared for the feast" (63).

      (47) Akiba ben Joseph (born about 50 C.E., died about 132) was
      the greatest of the _Tannaim_ (teachers mentioned in the
      _Mishnah_).  He was a "proselyte of righteousness" (_ger
      tzedek_).  Until middle age, he remained illiterate and averse
      to study, but was spurred on to become learned in the _Torah_
      by the daughter of the rich Kalba Shabua, whom he subsequently
      married.  He was the pupil of R. Eliezer ben Hyrcanos, R.
      Jochanan ben Chanania, and Nahum of Gimzo.  He espoused the
      cause of Bar Kochba, acknowledging him as the Messiah, and is
      said to have travelled throughout the land stirring up
      opposition to Rome.  At the fall of Betar, he was captured by
      the Romans, and most cruelly put to death, expiring with the
      _Shema_ upon his lips.  R. Akiba definitely fixed the canon of
      the Old Testament.  He compiled and systematized the
      traditional law, in this respect being the forerunner of R.
      Judah ha-Nasi (see chapter II, n. 1), whose _Mishnah_ may be
      considered as being derived from that of the school of Akiba.
      His importance may be gauged by the following statement from
      the _Talmud_, "Our _Mishnah_ comes directly from R. Meir (a
      disciple of Akiba), the _Tosefta_ from R. Nehemiah, the
      _Sifra_ from R. Judah, and the _Sifre_ from R. Simon; but they
      all took Akiba for a model in their works and followed him"
      (_Sanhedrin_, 86a).  Akiba introduced a new method of
      interpreting Scripture, in which not a word, syllable, or
      letter was considered superfluous, finding thereby a basis for
      many oral laws.  His hermeneutical and exegetical activities
      were remarkable.  Many interesting legends have clustered
      around his name.

      (48) _Massorah_, from root _masar_, "to deliver," "hand over,"
      "transmit," means a "chain of tradition."  It is used to
      designate tradition in general, and is thus correlative with
      _kabbalah_.  The _Massorah_ contains information for the
      correct transcription of the Scripture.  As used here, it
      means the traditional interpretation of the _Torah_.  Cf.
      chapter I, 1, "Moses received the _Torah_ on Sinai, and handed
      it down (_umsarah_) to Joshua," and "make a fence around the
      _Torah_."

      (56) The omniscience and prescience of God do not deprive men
      of free will.  Maimonides explains this in the last chapter of
      the _Shemonah Perakim_ (ed. Gorfinkle, p. 85 _et seq._).

      (57) Maimonides interprets the last phrase as meaning to do
      many small deeds of charity rather than one great deed of
      goodness.  For instance, it is better to distribute one
      hundred coins among one hundred people than to give them all
      to one person.

      (58) The world is compared to the office of a merchant.

      (59) "for man also knoweth not his time, like the
      fishes that are caught in an evil net."

      (60) The shop stands for the world and its enjoyments.

      (61) Man has free will, and is therefore responsible for all
      his acts.

      (62) For everything is recorded.

      (63) This world is merely a preparation for the next.  The
      enjoyment of the world to come is likened by the Rabbis to a
      banquet, which is shared in by the good and the bad, after
      they have paid off their moral debts.

21. R. Eleazar, the son of Azariah (64), said, "Where there is no
_Torah_, there are no manners; where there are no manners, there is no
_Torah_: where there is no wisdom, there is no fear of God; where
there is no fear of God, there is no wisdom: where there is no
knowledge, there no understanding; where there is no understanding,
there is no knowledge (65): where there is no meal, there is no
_Torah;_ where there is no _Torah_, there is no meal" (66).  22. He
used to say, "He whose wisdom exceeds his works, to what is he like?
To a tree whose branches are many, but whose roots are few; and the
wind comes and plucks it up, and overturns it upon its face, as it is
said, 'And he shall be like a lonely juniper tree in the desert, and
shall not see when good cometh; but shall inhabit the parched places
in the wilderness, a salt land and not inhabited'.  But he whose
works exceed his wisdom, to what is he like?  To a tree whose branches
are few, but whose roots are many, so that though all the winds in the
world come and blow upon it, they cannot stir it from its place, as it
is said, 'And he shall be as a tree planted by the waters; and that
spreadeth out its roots by the river and shall not perceive when heat
cometh, but his leaf shall be green; and shall not be troubled in the
year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit'".

      (64) R. Eleazar ben Azariah, a Mishnaic scholar of the first
      century, was of a rich and influential family, and was a
      descendent of Ezra the Scribe.  At seventeen or eighteen, upon
      the deposition of Gamaliel II, Eleazar, because of his
      popularity and erudition, was chosen to fill the position of
      the president of the academy at Jabneh.  Upon Gamaliel's
      restoration, he was made vice-president (_Ab bet din_).

      (65) Cf. Prov. IX, 10: "The fear of the Lord is the beginning
      of wisdom, and the knowledge of the holy is understanding."

      (66) Where there is a want of the means of sustenance there is
      no studying of _Torah_, and without spiritual nourishment,
      physical nourishment has no value.

23. R. Eleazar Chisma (69) said, "The laws concerning the sacrifices
of birds and the purification of women are essential ordinances (70);
astronomy and geometry are the after-courses of wisdom" (71).

Rabbi Chanania, the son of Akashia, said, "The Holy One, blessed be
He, was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore He gave them a
copious _Torah_ and many commandments, as it is said, 'It pleased the
Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the _Torah_ and make it
honorable'".

      (69) A contemporary of AKiba.

      (70) _Kinnim_, "nests," is the name of a tract in _Seder
      Kodashim_ of the _Mishnah_, and tells of the young birds,
      which men and women were at times required to offer as
      sacrifice.  _Niddah_ is a tract of _Seder Teharot_ of the
      _Mishnah_, and relates of the uncleannesses of woman.

      (71) _I.e._, the mathematical sciences, in which R. Eleazar
      was very proficient, are only to be considered as helps to the
      study of the essentials of _Torah_.


CHAPTER IV

All Israel have a portion in the world to come, and it is said, "And
thy people shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land for
ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be
glorified".

1. Ben Zoma (1) said, "Who is wise?  He who learns from all men, as it
is said, 'from all my teachers have I gotten understanding'.  Who
is mighty?  He who controls his passions, as it is said, 'He that is
slow to anger is better than the mighty, and he that ruleth over his
spirit than he that taketh a city'.  Who is rich?  He who rejoices
in his portion, as it is said, 'When thou eatest the labor of thine
hands, happy art thou, and it shall be well with thee'; happy art
thou in this world, and it shall be well with thee in the world to
come.  Who is honored?  He who honors others, as it is said, 'For them
that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me shall be held in
contempt'".

      (1) Simon ben Zoma and Simon ben Azzai, _Tannaim_ of the
      second century, were generally known as ben Zoma and ben
      Azzai, as they never received the title of Rabbi, according to
      one view.  According to another opinion, they were called by
      their fathers' names, because they both died young.  Together
      with Akiba and Elisha ben Abuyah (_Acher_), they entered,
      legend says, into the paradise of esoteric knowledge.  "Four
      (sages)," we are told, "entered paradise, ben Azzai, ben Zoma,
      Acher, and Akiba.  Ben Azzai looked and died; ben Zoma went
      mad; Acher destroyed the plants; Akiba alone came out unhurt"
      (_Chagigah_, 14b).  The interpretation of this passage is that
      ben Azzai died prematurely, worn out by his activities in
      mystical and theosophic speculation; ben Zoma became demented
      thereby; Elisha, contemptuously referred to as Acher (the
      other), became an apostate; but Akiba was unaffected.  Ben
      Zoma was famous for his wisdom, it being said of him, "Whoever
      sees ben Zoma in his dream is assured of scholarship"
      (_Berachot_, 57b).  With him, it was said, the last of the
      interpreters of the Law (_darshanim_) died (_Sotah_, 49b).
      His interpretation of the biblical passage "that thou mayest
      remember when thou camest forth out of Egypt" is found in the
      _Haggadah_ of Passover eve.

2. Ben Azzai (6) said, "Hasten to do even a slight precept, and
flee from transgression; for one virtue leads to another, and
transgression draws transgression in its train; for the recompense of
a virtue is a virtue, and the recompense of a transgression is a
transgression" (8).  3. He used to say, "Despise not any man, and carp
not at any thing (9); for there is not a man that has not his hour,
and there is not a thing that has not its place."

      (6) Simon ben Azzai (see n. 1) was a very assiduous student
      and a man of great piety.  He was betrothed to the daughter of
      Akiba, but separated from his prospective wife in order to
      devote all of his time to study.  It was said of him, "At the
      death of ben Azzai, the last industrious man passed away"
      (_Sotah_ IX, 15), and "He who sees ben Azzai in a dream might
      hope for saintliness."  He declared that the greatest
      principle of Judaism is the belief in the common brotherhood
      of all mankind, which he derived from the passage, Genesis VI,
      1, "This is the generation of Adam (man)."

      (8) Well-doing is the fruit of well-doing, and evil-doing the
      fruit of evil-doing.

      (9) Or "do not consider anything as being impossible."

4. R. Levitas of Jabneh said, "Be exceedingly lowly of spirit (10),
since the hope of man is but the worm."

      (10) R. Levitas lived probably about 120 C.E.  Maimonides
      declares that the medium way between the extremes of the _too
      little_ and the _too much_ is the path of virtue, but he makes
      an exception in the case of humility, and, in accordance with
      this passage, considers the extreme of being very humble the
      virtue.

5. R. Jochanan, the son of Berokah (11), said, "Whosoever profanes the
Name of Heaven (12) in secret will suffer the penalty for it in
public; and this, whether the Heavenly Name be profaned in ignorance
or in wilfulness."

      (11) A contemporary of Akiba.

      (12) "Name of Heaven" is a common substitute for the "name of
      God."

6. R. Ishmael (13), his son, said, "He who learns in order to teach
(14), to him the means will be granted both to learn and to teach; but
he who learns in order to practise, to him the means will be granted
to learn, and to teach, to observe, and to practise."

      (13) He lived about 150 C.E.

      (14) To one who learns _Torah_ and does not teach it are
      applied the words in Num. XV, 31: "he hath despised the word
      of the Lord".

7. R. Zadok said, "Separate not thyself from the congregation; (in the
judge's office) act not the counsel's part; make not of the
_Torah_ a crown wherewith to aggrandize thyself, nor a spade wherewith
to dig" (16).  So also used Hillel to say, "He who makes a worldly use
of the crown (of the _Torah_) shall waste away".  Hence thou
mayest infer that whosoever derives a profit for himself from the
words of the _Torah_ is helping on his own destruction.

      (16) _I.e._, for material and selfish ends.

8. R. Jose (18) said, "Whoso honors the _Torah_ will himself be
honored by mankind, but whoso dishonors the _Torah_ will himself be
dishonored by mankind."

      (18) R. Jose ben Chalafta was a contemporary of R. Meir.

9. R. Ishmael (19), his son, said, "He who shuns the judicial office
rids himself of hatred, robbery, and vain swearing (20); but he who
presumptuously lays down decisions is foolish, wicked, and of an
arrogant spirit."  10. He used to say, "Judge not alone, for none may
judge alone save One; neither say (to thy judicial colleagues),
'Accept my view,' for the choice is theirs (to concur); and it is not
for thee (to compel concurrence)."

      (19) He lived about 160-220 C.E.

      (20) The judge brings upon himself the hatred of the one who
      is disappointed by his judgment.  An erroneous judgment is
      equivalent to robbery.  When the judge exacts an unnecessary
      oath, perjury may result.

11. R. Jonathan (21) said, "Whoso fulfils the _Torah_ in the midst of
poverty shall in the end fulfil it in the midst of wealth; and whoso
neglects the _Torah_ in the midst of wealth shall in the end neglect
it in the midst of poverty."

      (21) He lived about the middle of the second century C.E.  He
      was a pupil of R. Ishmael (verse 9).

12. R. Meir said, "Lessen thy toil for worldly goods, and be busy
in the _Torah_; be humble of spirit before all men; if thou neglectest
the _Torah_, many causes for neglecting it will be present themselves
to thee, but if thou laborest in the _Torah_, He has abundant
recompense to give thee."

13. R. Elieser (23), the son of Jacob, said, "He who does one precept
has gotten himself one advocate; and he who commits one transgression
has gotten himself one accuser.  Repentance and good deeds are as a
shield against punishment."

      (23) He lived about 140 C.E.

14. R. Jochanan, the sandal-maker (24), said, "Every assembly which is
in the Name of Heaven will in the end be established, but that which
is not in the Name of Heaven will not in the end be established."

      (24) Most of the Rabbis believed with Rabban Gamaliel that the
      study of the _Torah_ without employment brings transgression
      (chapter II, 2).  Consequently, each invariably followed some
      vocation.  Hillel, the senior, gained his livelihood as a
      wood-chopper; Shammai was a builder; R. Joshua, a blacksmith;
      R. Chanina, a shoemaker; R. Huna, a water-carrier; R. Abba, a
      tailor; R. Pappa, a brewer, etc.  Other Rabbis whose names
      indicate their trades, as R. Jochanan ha-Sandalar (lived about
      150 C.E.), were Isaac Nappacha (the smith) and R. Abin Naggara
      (the carpenter).  Many were merchants and others
      agriculturists.  Generally, the Rabbi studied during
      two-thirds of the day, and worked at his trade during the
      remainder.  Those engaged in agriculture would study in the
      winter and till the soil in the summer.

15. R. Eleazer, the son of Shammua (25), said, "Let the honor of thy
disciple be as dear to thee as thine own, and the honor of thine
associate be like the fear of thy master, and the fear of thy master
like the fear of Heaven."

      (25) He lived about 150 C.E.

16. R. Judah (26) said, "Be cautious in study, for an error in study
may amount to presumptuous sin".

      (26) R. Judah ben Ilai lived about 140 C.E.

17. R. Simeon said, "There are three crowns: the crown of
_Torah_, the crown of priesthood, and the crown of royalty; but the
crown of a good name excels them all."

18. R. Nehorai (29) said, "Betake thyself to a home of the _Torah_
(30), and say not that the _Torah_ will come after thee; for there thy
associates will establish thee in the possession of it; and lean not
upon thine own understanding".

      (29) He lived about 130 C.E.

      (30) If there is no teacher where you live.

19. R. Jannia said, "It is not in our power (to explain) either the
prosperity of the wicked or the afflictions of the righteous."

20. R. Mattithiah, the son of Heresh (32), said, "Be beforehand in the
salutation of peace to all men; and be rather a tail to lions than a
head to foxes" (33).

      (32) He lived about 120 C.E. in Rome.

      (33) It is better to be a pupil of great teachers than to be a
      teacher of worthless pupils (Maimonides).  It is better to
      follow those who are greater than to lead those who are
      inferior.

21. R. Jacob (34) said, "This world is like a vestibule before the
world to come (35); prepare thyself in the vestibule, that thou mayest
enter into the hall."  22. He used to say, "Better is one hour of
repentance and good deeds in this world than the whole life of the
world to come; and better is one hour of blissfulness of spirit in the
world to come than the whole life of this world."

      (34) He lived about 160-220 C.E.

      (35) This world is a bridge that leads to the future world
      (Maimonides).

23. R. Simeon, the son of Eleazer (36), said, "Do not appease thy
fellow in the hour of his anger, and comfort him not in the hour when
his dead lies before him, and question him not in the hour of his vow,
and rush not to see him in the hour of his disgrace."

      (36) A pupil of R. Meir.  He lived about 160-220 C.E.

24. Samuel (37), the younger, used to say, "Rejoice not when thine
enemy falleth, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth: lest
the Lord see it and it displease him, and he turn away his wrath from
him".

      (37) Samuel (about 120 C.E.) is said to have composed, at the
      request of R. Gamaliel II, the prayer against heretics, added
      to the "Eighteen Benedictions."

25. Elisha, the son of Abuyah (39), said, "If one learns as a child,
what is it like?  Like ink written in clean paper.  If one learns as
an old man, what is it like?  Like ink written on used paper" (40).

      (39) Elisha ben Abuyah, otherwise known as
      Acher, lived at the end of the first and the beginning of the
      second century.  He is charged by the Rabbis with having aided
      the Romans in their attempts to suppress the Jewish religion,
      with having endeavored to estrange the young from Judaism and
      from the study of its literature, with having intentionally
      and openly broken the ceremonial laws, and with having
      desecrated the Sabbath.  R. Meir, his pupil, maintained a
      close intimacy with him, in spite of his apostacy, having high
      regard for Elisha's intellectual worth.  When reproached for
      this, R. Meir said, "I eat the kernel, and throw away the
      husks."  Elisha is often referred to as the "Faust of the
      _Talmud_." Some have even identified him
      with Jesus.  In _Abot de-Rabbi Natan_, a parable that is very
      similar to that of Jesus, in Luke VI 47-49, is attributed to
      Elisha.  "A man who does good deeds and diligently studies the
      Law, to whom is he likened?  He is like a man building a house
      with a stone foundation and with tiles (on the roof); and when
      a flood arises, and breaks against the walls, that house
      cannot be moved from its place.  But the man who lives an evil
      life, in spite of having deeply studied the Law, to whom is he
      like?  He is like a man building a house with tiles for a
      foundation and with heavy stones (on the roof); and when a
      little rain comes, straightway the house falls in".

      (40) What one learns in youth, one retains, while the opposite
      is true of learning in old age.  The Rabbis, elsewhere, liken
      learning in youth to engraving upon a stone, and learning in
      old age to writing on the sand.

26. R. Jose, the son of Judah (41), of Chefar Babli said, "He who
learns from the young, to what is he like?  To one who eats unripe
grapes, and drinks wine from his vat (42).  And he who learns from the
old, to what is he like?  To one who eats ripe grapes, and drinks old
wine."

      (41) A contemporary of Judah ha-Nasi.

      (42) _I.e._, wine that is not forty days old, and not yet
      clarified.

27. Rabbi Meir said, "Look not at the flask, but at what it
contains: there may be a new flask full of old wine, and an old flask
that has not even new wine in it" (44).

      (44) This verse expresses an opinion contrary to that of the
      preceding one.  The mind of a young man may be more mature
      than that of an old man.

28. R. Eleazar ha-Kappar (45) said, "Envy, cupidity, and ambition take
a man from the world" (46).

      (45) A contemporary of Judah ha-Nasi.

29. He used to say, "They that are born are doomed to die; and the
dead to be brought to life again; and the living to be judged, to
know, to make known, and to be made conscious that He is God, He the
Maker, He the Creator, He the Discerner (47), He the Judge, He the
Witness, He the Accuser; He it is that will in future judge,
blessed be He, with Whom there is no unrighteousness, nor
forgetfulness, nor respect of persons, nor taking of bribes (49); and
know also that everything is according to the reckoning (50); and let
not thy imagination give thee hope that the grave will be a place of
refuge for thee; for perforce thou wast formed, and perforce thou wast
born, and thou livest perforce, and perforce thou wilt die, and
perforce thou wilt in the future have to give account and reckoning
before the Supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be He."

      (47) "He fashioneth their hearts
      altogether; he hath regard to all their works."

      (49) Cf. II Chron. XIX, 7: "Take heed and act; for with the
      Lord our God there is no injustice, nor respect for persons,
      nor taking of bribes."  Maimonides interprets this verse of
      _Abot_ as meaning that one cannot bribe God with good deeds in
      order to have bad deeds forgiven.  The one bad deed is not
      forgiven even by the doing of one hundred good ones, but
      punishment is meted out for the bad deed and reward in full
      for the hundred good ones.  That is, each action is judged
      entirely on its own merits.  Neither is God a respecter of
      persons.  On the one hand, He punished Moses for his anger at
      the waters of Meribah, and, on the other, He rewarded Esau for
      honoring his parents, and Nebuchadnezzar for honoring God.

      (50) Maimonides interprets as follows, "Think of the physical
      things in which man has no choice, as our sages said, 'All is
      in the power of God, except the fear of God.'  It is not said
      that one must perforce, and against one's will, sin, or that
      one is constrained to journey, walk, stand, etc., for these
      are in the power of man, and are dependent upon his own free
      will, and not upon any (external) compelling force, as we have
      explained in chapter eight."

Rabbi Chanania, the son of Akashia, said, "The Holy One, blessed be
He, was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore He gave them a
copious _Torah_ and many commandments, as it is said, 'It pleased the
Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the _Torah_ and make it
honorable'".

CHAPTER V

All Israel have a portion in the world to come, and it is said, "And
thy people shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land for
ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be
glorified".

1. With ten sayings the world was created.  What does this teach us?
Could it not have been created with one saying?  It is to make known
the punishment that will befall the wicked who destroy the world that
was created with ten sayings, as well as the goodly reward that will
be bestowed upon the just who preserve the world that was created with
ten sayings (1).  2. There were ten generations from Adam to Noah, to
make known how long-suffering God is, seeing that all those
generations continued provoking him, until he brought upon them the
waters of the flood (2).  3. There were ten generations from Noah to
Abraham, to make known how long-suffering God is, seeing that all
those generations continued provoking him, until Abraham, our father,
came, and received the reward they should all have earned (3).  4.
With ten trials our father Abraham was tried (4), and he stood firm in
them all, to make known how great was the love of our father Abraham
(5).  5. Ten miracles were wrought for our fathers in Egypt (6), and
ten at the Sea (7).  6. Ten plagues did the Holy One, blessed be He,
bring upon the Egyptians in Egypt, and ten at the Sea (8).  7. With
ten temptations did our fathers tempt the Holy One, blessed be He, in
the wilderness, as it is said, "And they tempted me these ten times,
and have not hearkened to my voice" (9).  8. Ten miracles were wrought
for our fathers in the Temple; no woman miscarried from the scent of
the holy flesh; the holy flesh never became putrid; no fly (10) was
seen in the slaughter-house; no unclean accident ever befell the
high-priest on the Day of Atonement; the rain never quenched the fire
of the wood-pile on the altar (11); neither did the wind overcome the
column of smoke that arose therefrom (12); nor was there ever found
any disqualifying defect in the omer (of new barley, offered on the
second day of Passover) or in the two loaves (the first fruits of the
wheat-harvest, offered on Pentecost) (13), or in the shewbread (14);
though the people stood closely pressed together, they found ample
space to prostrate themselves; never did serpent or scorpion injure
any one in Jerusalem; nor did any man ever say to his fellow, "the
place is too strait for me (15) to lodge over night in Jerusalem."  9.
Ten things were created on the eve of Sabbath in the twilight (16):
the mouth of the earth (17); the mouth of the well (18); the mouth of
the ass (19); the rainbow (20); the manna (21); the rod (22); the
shamir (23); the shape of written characters; the writing, and the
tables of stone: some say, the destroying spirits also, and the
sepulchre of Moses (24), and the ram of Abraham our father (25); and
others say, tongs, also, made with tongs (26).

      (1) The expression "and God said" occurs ten times in Genesis
      I (verses 3, 6, 9, 11, 14, 20, 24, 26 28, and 29).  Many
      commentators count the opening phrase of this chapter, "In the
      beginning God created the heavens and the earth," as one of
      the sayings, maintaining that the idea of saying is implied in
      it. According to the Rabbis, the wicked
      destroy and the righteous preserve the world, and, since it
      required ten sayings to create the world, the guilt of the
      sinner and the righteousness of the just are emphasized more
      than if it had been created merely by one word.

      (2) The ten generations are Adam, Seth, Enosh, Kenan,
      Mahalalel, Jared, Enoch, Methusaleh, Lamech, and Noah.  The
      period from Adam to Noah is known as the "generation of the
      flood".

      (3) These are Shem, Arpachshad, Shelah, Eber, Peleg, Reu,
      Serug, Nahor, Terah, and Abraham.  Noah's good deeds were
      sufficient only to save himself and family, while Abraham's
      were sufficient to sustain the whole world.

      (4) These trials may be reckoned as follows: (1) his
      migration, Gen. XII, 12; (2) the famine in Canaan, XII, 10;
      (3) the seizing of Sarah by Pharaoh, XII, 15; (4) the battle
      with the four kings, XIV; (5) his marriage with Hagar because
      of Sarah's sterility, XVI, 2; (6) the circumcision, XVII, 10;
      (7) the seizing of Sarah by Abimelech, king of Gerar, XX, 2;
      (8) the banishment of Hagar, XXI, 10; (9) the banishment of
      Ishmael, XXI, 10; and (10) God's command to sacrifice Isaac.

      (5) For God.  Some interpreters explain this, however, as "the
      love of God for Abraham."

      (6) That they escaped the ten plagues with which the Egyptians
      were afflicted.

      (7) Legend says that at the passage of the Red Sea the ten
      miracles wrought were as follows: (1) the waters divided; (2)
      the waters were like a tent, or a vault; (3) the sea-bed was
      dry and hard; (4) but when the Egyptians trod upon it, it
      became muddy and slimy; (5) the sea was divided into twelve
      parts, one for each tribe; (6) the waters became as hard as
      stone; (7) the congealed waters appeared like blocks of
      building-stone; (8) the water was transparent so that the
      tribes could see one another; (9) fresh drinking water flowed
      from the congealed water; (10) after Israel had partaken of
      the drinking water, it became congealed, and did not wet the
      ground under foot.

      (8) This verse is not found in the Talmudic versions of
      _Abot_.  The plagues at the sea are alluded to in the "Song of
      Moses."

      (10) The fly is a symbol of impurity.

      (11) The altar stood in the midst of the roofless Temple-hall.

      (12) The straight column of smoke denoted the acceptance of
      prayer and sacrifice.

      (14) Every Sabbath, twelve loaves of bread were placed on a
      table in the Sanctuary "before the Lord" (Lev. XXIV, 5-9) to
      serve as a constant reminder to the twelve tribes that their
      place was before the altar of God.

      (16) Since all things were said to have been created during
      the first six days of creation, and since "there is nothing
      new under the sun" (Eccles. I, 9), everything miraculous or
      supernatural that existed or occurred after creation was
      explained by the Rabbis as having been made or preordained in
      the twilight at the moment of transition between the end of
      the work of creation and the beginning of the Sabbath.

      (17) To swallow Korah and his followers.

      (18) Which supplied the Israelites with water during their
      wandering in the wilderness.

      (23) A miraculous worm that split stones by its look.  It was
      used, according to legend, to engrave the names of the tribes
      on the jewels of the ephod of the high-priest, and was also
      employed by Solomon in the construction of the Temple, in
      which no tools of iron were used.

      (26) An allusion to a saying found in _Tosefta Erubin_, "Tongs
      are made with tongs; but how was the first pair made?  It
      could only have been a creation of God."  One instrument
      presupposes another; one thing is the cause of another, but
      the original cause is God.

10. There are seven marks of an uncultured, and seven of a wise man.
The wise man does not speak before him who is greater than he in
wisdom; and does not interrupt the speech of his companion; he is not
hasty to answer; he questions according to the subject-matter; and
answers to the point; he speaks upon the first thing first, and upon
the last, last; regarding that which he has not understood he says, "I
do not understand it;" and he acknowledges the truth.  The reverse of
all this is to be found in an uncultured man.  11. Seven kinds of
punishment come into the world for seven important transgressions.  If
some give their tithes (27) and others do not, a dearth ensues from
drought and some suffer hunger while others are full.  If they all
determine to give no tithes, a dearth ensures from tumult (28) and
drought.  If they further resolve not to give the dough-cake (29), an
exterminating dearth ensures.  Pestilence comes into the world to
fulfil those death penalties threatened in the _Torah_, the execution
of which, however, is within the function of a human tribunal (30),
and for the violation of the law regarding the fruits of the seventh
year (31).  The sword (32) comes into the world for the delay of
justice, and for the perversion of justice, and on account of the
offence of those who interpret the _Torah_, not according to its true
sense (33).  Noxious beasts come into the world for vain swearing
(34), and for the profanation of the Divine Name (35).  Captivity
comes into the world on account of idolatry, immortality, bloodshed,
and the neglect of the year of rest for the soil (31).  12. At four
periods pestilence grows apace: in the fourth year, in the seventh, at
the conclusion of the seventh year, and at the conclusion of the Feast
of Tabernacles in each year: in the fourth year, for default of giving
the tithe to the poor in the third year (36); in the seventh year, for
default of giving the title to the poor in the sixth year (37); at the
conclusion of the seventh year, for the violation of the law regarding
the fruits of the seventh year (31), and at the conclusion of the
Feast of Tabernacles in each year, for robbing the poor of the grants
legally assigned to them (38).

      (28) Of war, when agriculture is neglected, and crops are
      destroyed, etc.

      (29) It is written "Ye shall offer up a cake of the first of
      your dough for a heave offering."  This commandment is
      observed in spirit to-day by the Jewish housewife, who takes a
      part of bread which is kneaded, and burns it, after reciting
      the blessing, "Blessed art Thou, O Lord, our God, King of the
      universe, Who has sanctified us by Thy commandments, and
      commanded us to separate the _challah_."

      (30) The execution of which is in the hands of God.

      (31) That is, the Sabbatical year or the year of release
      (_ha-shemittah_).

      (32) _I.e._, war.

      (33) By prohibiting the permissible and permitting the
      prohibited.

      (37) Of the septennial cycle.  The tithe was to be brought at
      the end of _every_ three years.

      (38) _I.e._, the gleanings and the forgotten sheaves of the
      harvest, the single bunches of grapes of the vineyard, and the
      unreaped corners of the fields which were assigned to the
      stranger, the fatherless, and the widow.

13. There are four characters among men: he who says, "What is mine is
mine and what is thine is thine," his is a neutral character; some
say, "This is a character like that of Sodom" (39); he who says, "What
is mine is thine and what is thine is mine," is a boor (40); he who
says, "What is mine is thine and what is thine is thine," is a saint;
he who says, "What is thine is mine and what is mine is mine," is a
wicked man.  14. There are four kinds of tempers: he whom it is easy
to provoke and easy to pacify, his loss disappears in his gain; he
whom it is hard to provoke and hard to pacify, his gain disappears in
his loss; he whom it is hard to provoke and easy to pacify is a saint;
he whom it is easy to provoke and hard to pacify is a wicked man.  15.
There are four qualities in disciples: he who quickly understands and
quickly forgets, his gain disappears in his loss; he who understands
with difficulty and forgets with difficulty, his loss disappears in
his gain; he who understands quickly and forgets with difficulty, his
is a good portion; he who understands with difficulty and forgets
quickly, his is an evil portion.  16. As to almsgiving there are four
dispositions: he who desires to give, but that others should not give,
his eye is evil toward what appertains to others (41); he who desires
that others should give, but will not give himself, his eye is evil
against what is his own; he who gives and wishes others to give is a
saint; he who will not give and does not wish others to give is a
wicked man.  17. There are four characters among those who attend the
house of study: he who goes and does not practise (42) secures the
reward for going; he who practises (43) but does not go secures the
reward for practising; he who goes and practises is a saint; he who
neither goes nor practises is a wicked man.  18. There are four
qualities among those that sit before the wise: they are like a
sponge, a funnel, a strainer, or a sieve: a sponge, which sucks up
everything (44); a funnel, which lets in at one end and out at the
other; a strainer, which lets the wine pass out and retains the dregs;
a sieve, which lets out the bran and retains the fine flour.

19. Whenever love depends upon some material cause, with the passing
away of that cause, the love, too, passes away; but if it be not
depending upon such a cause, it will not pass away for ever.  Which
love was that which depended upon a material cause?  Such was the love
of Ammon and Tamar.  And that which depended upon no such cause?
Such was the love of David and Jonathan. Lasting love is disinterested love.

20. Every controversy that is in the Name of Heaven shall in the
end lead to a permanent result, but every controversy that is not in
the Name of Heaven shall not lead to a permanent result.  Which
controversy was that which was in the Name of Heaven?  Such was the
controversy of Hillel and Shammai.  And that which was not in the
Name of Heaven?  Such was the controversy of Korah and all his company.

21. Whosoever causes the multitude to be righteous, over him sin
prevails not; but he who causes the multitude to sin shall not have
the means to repent.  Moses was righteous and made the multitude
righteous; the righteousness of the multitude was laid upon him, as it
is said, "He executed the justice of the Lord and his judgments with
Israel".  Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, sinned and caused the
multitude to sin; the sin of the multitude was laid upon him, as it is
said, "For the sins of Jeroboam which he sinned and which he made
Israel to sin".

      He who leads the people astray is punished by being
      prevented from repenting.  This does not mean, however, that
      man, in general, does not act in accordance with his own free
      will.  Maimonides, in discussing this problem, says, in the
      eighth chapter of the _Shemonah Perakim_, "Just as some of
      man's undertakings, which are ordinarily subject to his own
      free will, are frustrated by way of punishment, as, for
      instance, a man's hand being prevented from working so that he
      can do nothing with it, as was the case of Jeroboam, the son
      of Nebat, or a man's eyes from seeing, as happened to the
      Sodomites, who had assembled about Lot, likewise how does God
      withhold man's ability to use his own free will in regard to
      repentance, so that it never occurs to him to repent, and he
      thus finally perishes in his own wickedness."

22. Whosoever has these three attributes is of the disciples of
Abraham, our father, but whosoever has three other attributes is of
the disciples of Balaam, the wicked.  A good eye, a humble
mind, and a lowly spirit (are the tokens) of the disciples of Abraham,
our father; an evil eye, a haughty mind, and a proud spirit (are the
signs) of the disciples of Balaam, the wicked.  What is the difference
between the disciples of Abraham, our father, and those of Balaam, the
wicked?  The disciples of Abraham, our father, enjoy this world and
inherit the world to come, as it is said, "That I may cause those that
love me to inherit substance, and may fill all their treasuries";
but the disciples of Balaam, the wicked, inherit _Gehinnom_, and
descend into the pit of destruction, as it is said, "But thou, O God,
wilt bring them down into the pit of destruction; bloodthirsty and
deceitful men shall not live out half their days; but I will trust in
thee".

23. Judah, the son of Tema, said, "Be bold as a leopard, swift as an
eagle, fleet as a hart, and strong as a lion, to do the will of thy
Father who is in Heaven" 24. He used to say, "At five
years (the age is reached for the study of the) Scripture, at ten for
(the study of) the _Mishnah_, at thirteen for (the fulfilment of)
the commandments, at fifteen for (the study of) the _Talmud_, 
at eighteen for marriage, at twenty for seeking (a livelihood), 
at thirty for (entering into one's full) strength, at forty for
understanding, at fifty for counsel, at sixty (a man attains) old age,
at seventy the hoary head, at eighty (the gift of special) strength,
at ninety, (he bends beneath) the weight of years, at a hundred
he is as if he were already dead and had passed away from the world."

      "Our Father which is in Heaven" of the "Lord's
      Prayer".  The conception of God as a "Father"
      goes back to earliest times. "Doubtless Thou art our Father."  
      In the _Mishnah_ we find, "Who purifies you? Your Father which is in 
      Heaven"; "On whom have we to lean?  On our Father 
      which is in Heaven", and similar passages.  
      The Rabbis constantly referred to God as "Father".  
      They took issue, of course, with the New Testament
      conception of God, in not admitting and in denouncing the idea
      of a mediator. To them all mankind were the sons of God.
      That the Rabbis borrowed this God-idea and the expression "Our
      Father which is in Heaven" from Christianity or worship of Christ 
      is untenable, for, as Herford points out, 
      such borrowing would have been abhorrent to them.  This expression
      was undoubtedly current long before and during the time of
      Jesus Christ, and it represented a conception of the divine
      acceptable to both the Rabbis and Jesus.  The Rabbis had no
      quarrel with Christianity on this score, but did not admit the
      "sonship" of God in the Christian sense.  The expressions "Our
      Father" and "Our Father which is in Heaven" are found
      frequently in the Jewish Prayer-book.

      The _Mishnah_ is the oral or unwritten law based on the
      written law contained in the Pentateuch (see chapter I, n. 1).
       The _Mishnah_, _par excellence_, is the codification made by
      Judah ha-Nasi. It is divided into six
      orders or sections known as _sedarim_.  They are (1) _Zeraim_,
      "seeds," which contains the laws regarding the cultivation of
      the land and its products, introduced by a treatise concerning
      prayer and benedictions (_Berachot_); (2) _Mode_, "festivals,"
      treating of the laws of the Sabbath and the festivals; (3)
      _Nashim_, "women," regulations concerning marriage and
      divorce; (4) _Nezikin_, "injuries" or "damages," civil and
      criminal law; (5) _Kodashim_, "holy things," the laws of
      sacrifice and of the service of the Temple; and (6) _Tohorot_,
      "purifications," dealing with the clean and the unclean.  Each
      order is subdivided into treatises (_massektot_), there being
      in all 63 such subdivisions.  The _Mishnah_ is known as the
      _shas_ ([shin''samech]), which word is formed from the first
      letters of the words _shishah sedarim_ (six orders).  The
      _Talmud_ is also similarly termed.

      At thirteen, the Jewish boy becomes _bar mitzwah_,
      _i.e._, "a son of commandment."  The rites and ceremonies
      connected with the _bar mitzwah_ of to-day cannot "be clearly
      traced earlier than the fourteenth century".

      The phrases; "teaching," "learning," "study."  Here, it
      signifies study for the purpose of elucidating the _Mishnah_.
      Some texts read, "for the study of the _Gemara_."  The
      _Gemara_ (from the Aramaic, meaning "learning," "completion")
      is a collection of explanations and discussions on the
      _Mishnah_.  The word _Talmud_ was afterwards applied to the
      _Mishnah_ plus the _Gemara_.  There is a translation of the
      _Talmud_ in English by Rodkinson, but it is free and
      incomplete in parts.

      The phrase; "at twenty, to pursue."  This has been variously
      interpreted as follows: (1) for seeking a livelihood; 
      (2) for the pursuit of military service; (3) the age
      "to pursue him for his deeds," for the celestial
      (tribunal) does not punish at an age less than twenty
      (Bartenora's second explanation; (4) for the pursuit of 
      ideals (Taylor); (5) to pursue the commandments.


25. Ben Bag Bag said, "Turn it, and turn it over again, for
everything is in it, and contemplate it, and wax grey and old over it,
and stir not from it, for thou canst have no better rule than this."

26. Ben He He said, "According to the labor is the reward".

Rabbi Chanania, the son of Akashia, said, "The Holy One, blessed be
He, was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore He gave them a
copious _Torah_ and many commandments, as it is said, 'It pleased the
Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the _Torah_ and make it
honorable'".

CHAPTER VI

THE ACQUISITION OF THE TORAH

All Israel have a portion in the world to come, and it is said, "And
thy people shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land for
ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be
glorified".

The sages taught (the following) in the language of the
_Mishnah_--blessed be He that made choice of them and their _Mishnah_.
 1. Rabbi Meir said, "Whosoever labors in the _Torah_ for its own
sake merits many things; and not only so, but the whole world is
indebted to him: he is called friend, beloved, a lover of the
All-present, a lover of mankind: it clothes him with meekness and
reverence; it fits him to become just, pious, upright, and faithful;
it keeps him far from sin, and brings him near to virtue; through him
are enjoyed counsel and sound knowledge, understanding and strength,
as it is said, 'Counsel is mind, and sound knowledge; I am
understanding; I have strength'.  It gives him sovereignty and
dominion and discerning judgment; to him the secrets of the _Torah_
are revealed; he is made like a never-failing spring and like a river
that flows on with ever-increasing vigor; he becomes modest,
long-suffering, and forgiving of insults; and it magnifies and exalts
him above all things."

      (2) Chapter III, n. 32.

2. R. Joshua, the son of Levi, said, "Every day an angle
goes forth from Mount Horeb, proclaiming and saying, 'Woe to mankind
for contempt of the _Torah_, for whoever does not occupy himself in
the _Torah_ is said to be under the divine censure, as it is said, 'As
a ring of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair woman who turneth
aside from discretion'; and it says, 'And the tables were the work
of God, and the writing was the writing of God, graven upon the
tables.' Read not freedom from obligation, but the freedom of responsibility, 
for no man is free but he who occupies himself in the learning of _Torah_. 
But whosoever labors in the _torah_, behold he shall be exalted, as it is
said, 'And from _Mattanah_ to _Nachaliel_, and from _Nachaliel_ to
_Bamot_'".

3. He who learns from his companion a single chapter, a single rule, a
single verse, a single expression, or even a single letter, ought to
pay him honor, for so we find with David, King of Israel, who learned
only two things from Ahitophel, and yet regarded him as his
master, his guide, and familiar friend, as it is said, "But it was
thou, a man, mine equal, my guide, and my familiar friend".  Now,
is it not an argument from minor to major, that if David, the
King of Israel, who learned only two things from Ahitophel, regarded
him as his master, guide, and familiar friend, he who learns from his
fellow a chapter, rule, verse, expression, or even a single letter, is
bound to pay him honor.  And "honor" is nothing but _Torah_, as it is
said, "The wise shall inherit honor and the perfect shall inherit
good".  And "good" is nothing but _Torah_, as it is said, "For I
give you good doctrine, forsake ye not my _Torah_".

4. This is the way that is becoming for the study of the _Torah_: a
morsel of bread with salt thou must eat, "and water by measure
thou must drink", thou must sleep upon the ground, and live a
life of trouble the while thou toilest in the _Torah_.  If thou doest
thus, "Happy shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee",
"happy shalt thou be" in this world, and "it shall be well with thee"
in the world to come.

5. Seek not greatness for thyself, and court not honor; let thy works
exceed thy learning; and crave not after the table of kings; for thy
table is greater than theirs, and thy crown is greater than theirs,
and thy Employer is faithful to pay thee the reward of thy work.

6. The _Torah_ is greater than the priesthood and than royalty, for
royalty demands thirty qualifications, the priesthood twenty-four, 
while the _Torah_ is acquired by forty-eight.  And these are
they: by audible study; by a listening ear; by distinct
pronunciation; by understanding and discernment of the heart; by
awe, reverence, meekness, cheerfulness; by ministering to the
sages, by attaching one's self to colleagues, by discussion with
disciples; by sedateness; by knowledge of the Scripture and of the
_Mishnah;_ by moderation in business, in intercourse with the world,
in pleasure, in sleep, in conversation, in laughter; by long
suffering; by a good heart; by faith in the wise; by resignation under
chastisement; by recognizing one's place, rejoicing in one's portion,
putting a fence to one's words, claiming no merit for one's self, by
being beloved, loving the All-present, loving mankind, loving just
courses, rectitude, and reproof; by keeping one's self far from honor,
not boasting of one's learning, nor delighting in giving decisions; by
bearing the yoke with one's fellow, judging him favorably, and leading
him to truth and peace; by being composed in one's study; by asking
and answering, hearing and adding thereto; by learning with the object
of teaching, and by learning with the object of practising; by making
one's master wise, fixing attention upon his discourse, and reporting
a thing in the name of who said it.  So thou hast learned, "Whosoever
reports a thing in the name of him that said it brings deliverance
into the world," as it is said, "And Esther told the king in the name
of Mordecai".

7. Great is the _Torah_, which gives life to those that practise it in
this world and in the world to come, as it is said, "For they are life
unto those that find them, and health to all their flesh"; and it
says, "It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones";
and it says, "It is a tree of life to them that grasp it, and of them
that uphold it every one is rendered happy"; and it says, "For
they shall be a chaplet of grace unto thy head, and chains about thy
neck"; and it says, "It shall give to thine head a chaplet of
grace, a crown of glory it shall deliver to thee"; and it says,
"For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life
shall be increased"; and it says, "Length of days is in its right
hand; in its left hand are riches and honor"; and it says, "For
length of days, and years of life, and peace shall they add to thee".

8. R. Simeon, the son of Judah, in the name of R. Simeon, the son of
Yohai, said, "Beauty, strength, riches, honor, wisdom, old age, a
hoary head, and children are comely to the righteous and comely to the
world, as it is said, 'The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be
found in the way of righteousness'; and it says, 'The glory of
young men is their strength, and the adornment of old men is the hoary
head'; and it says, 'A crown unto the wise is their riches';
and it says, 'Children's children are the crown of old men, and the
adornment of children are their fathers'; and it is said, 'Then
the moon shall be confounded and the sun ashamed; for the Lord of
hosts shall reign in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem, and before his
elders shall be glory'".  Rabbi Simeon, the son of Menasya, said,
"These seven qualifications which the sages enumerated as becoming to
the righteous were all realized in Rabbi Judah, the Prince, and
in his sons."

9. Rabbi Jose, the son of Kisma, said, "I was once walking by the
way, when a man met me and saluted me, and I returned the salutation.
He said to me, 'Rabbi, from what place art thou?'  I said to him, 'I
come from a great city of sages and scribes.'  He said to me, 'If thou
art willing to dwell with us in our place, I will give thee a thousand
thousand golden dinars and precious stones and pearls.'  I said to
him, 'Wert thou to give me all the silver and gold and precious stones
and pearls in the world, I would not dwell anywhere but in a home of
the _Torah';_ and thus it is written in the book of Psalms by the
hands of David, King of Israel, 'The law of thy mouth is better unto
me than thousands of gold and silver'; and not only so, but in
the hour of man's departure neither silver nor gold nor precious
stones nor pearls accompany him, but only _Torah_ and good works, as
it is said, 'When thou walkest it shall lead thee; when thou liest
down it shall watch over thee; and when thou awakest it shall talk
with thee'; 'when thou walkest it shall lead thee' - in this
world; and 'when thou awakest it shall talk with thee' - in the world
to come.  And it says, 'The silver is mine, and the gold is mine,
saith the Lord of hosts'".

10. Five possessions the Holy One, blessed be He, made especially His
own in His world, and these are they, the _Torah_, heaven and earth,
Abraham, Israel, and the house of the sanctuary.  Whence know we this
of the _Torah?_  Because it is written, "The Lord possessed me as the
beginning of his way, before his works, from of old".  Whence of
heaven and earth?  Because it is written, "Thus saith the Lord, the
heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool: what manner of
house will ye build unto me? and what manner of place for my rest?"
; and it says, "How manifold are thy works, O Lord!  In wisdom
hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy possessions".
Whence of Abraham?  Because it is written, "And he blessed him, and
said, 'Blessed be Abram of the Most High God, possessor of heaven and
earth".  Whence of Israel?  Because it is written, "Till thy
people pass over, O Lord, till the people pass over which thou hast
acquired"; and it says, "As for the saints that are in the earth,
they are the noble ones in whom is all my delight".  Whence of
the house of the sanctuary?  Because it is written, "The place, O
Lord, which thou hast made for Thee to dwell in, the sanctuary, O
Lord, which Thy hands have prepared"; and it says, "And he
brought them to the border of his sanctuary, to this mountain which
his right hand had acquired".  11. Whatsoever the Holy One,
blessed be He, created in His world He created but for His glory, as
it is said, "Everything that is called by my name, it is for my glory
I have created it, I have formed it, yea, I have made it"; and it
says, "The Lord shall reign for ever and ever".

Rabbi Chanania, the son of Akashia, said, "The Holy One, blessed be
He, was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore He gave them a
copious _Torah_ and many commandments, as it is said, 'It pleased the
Lord, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the _Torah_ and make it
honorable'".
